# Parsing

> To always have an efficient execution plan, you want to parse every SQL statement executed by the database engine. 
> But conversely, parsing is inherently a very expensive operation. 
> As a result, it must be minimized, and execution plans should be reused as much as possible — but not too much, though.

> The impact of parsing on overall performance is extremely variable. In some cases, it’s simply not noticeable. In other cases, it’s one of the major causes of performance problems. If you have problems with parsing, it usually means the application doesn’t handle it correctly. 


### how much parsing  (v$sess_time_model) ?

views tells how muc parsing doen (count), not how much time
> The problem is that several dynamic performance views contain counters that detail the number of soft parses, hard parses, and executions. These counters, as well as the ratios based on them, are useless because they provide no information about the time spent parsing. Note that with parses, this is a real problem because they have no typical duration. In fact, depending on the complexity of the SQL statement and the objects it references, the duration of parses commonly differs by several orders of magnitude. Simply put, such counters tell you only whether the database engine has done a few or many parses, without any information about whether this is a problem. Because of this, in practice they may be useful only for trending purposes.


You can get time here in `v$sess_time_model`
```oracle
WITH
  db_time AS (SELECT sid, value
              FROM v$sess_time_model
              WHERE 1=1
              AND sid = 18
              AND stat_name = 'DB time')
SELECT ses.stat_name AS statistic,
       round(ses.value / 1E6, 3) AS seconds,
       round(ses.value / nullif(tot.value, 0) * 1E2, 1) AS "%"
FROM v$sess_time_model ses, db_time tot
WHERE ses.sid = tot.sid
AND ses.stat_name <> 'DB time'
AND ses.value > 0
ORDER BY ses.value DESC;
```

Not much parsing here

| STATISTIC                                    | SECONDS | %     |
|:---------------------------------------------|:--------|:------|
| DB CPU                                       | 10.061  | 100.3 |
| sql execute elapsed time                     | 1.718   | 17.1  |
| parse time elapsed                           | 0.467   | 4.7   |
| hard parse elapsed time                      | 0.035   | 0.4   |
| hard parse \(sharing criteria\) elapsed time | 0.008   | 0.1   |

> Unfortunately, the time model statistics provided by the dynamic performance views just mentioned aren’t helpful in finding out just which SQL statements are causing the problem!

> If you are looking for hard facts and not just clues, there are only two sources of information you can use: 
> -  the output generated by SQL trace
> - -the active session history (v$active_session_history) 